---
layout: archive
title: "(1 / 50) Ehsan Khodabandeh - 22 Nov 2023"
permalink: /chat_1/
author_profile: true
---

Ehsan: Black coffee<br>
Me: Mini Chips Ahoy

As the Thanksgiving holidays approached, I found the perfect opportunity to kick-off the project that I’d been mulling over for the past couple of months. Though I have been working with Ehsan professionally for over a year now, each conversion with him brings fresh insights. His vibrant energy has inspired me since our first meeting when he interviewed me for the summer internship at Decision Spot. Since then, he has evolved into a mentor-like figure for me. When I decided to work on the 52CoffeesInOR project, Ehsan was the natural choice for the first interview not just because he is a familiar face who I felt comfortable asking for an interview, but also because I knew he would approach it with the seriousness and thoughtfulness it deserved.

Ehsan is a Principal Operations Research Scientist at Decision Spot. With over 7 years of experience working in the OR consulting space, Ehsan started his career at Opex Analytics when it was just 3 years into its inception. He also held roles at LLamasoft and Coupa Software, as the firm went through these acquisitions. In the fall of 2021, as Decision Spot was taking its first steps, Ehsan was the 1st person to join the team. Reflecting on his professional growth, he shared how his focus has shifted from working on single client projects in the initial stages of his career to now juggling multiple roles. Today, he works as a product developer, manages, and leads multiple projects, and gracefully embraces the role of HR within the firm. He is also the unofficial but enthusiastic head of our party planning committee - a role he takes as seriously as his other responsibilities.

Ehsan balances his roles at Decision Spot with another responsibility at Northwestern University as an adjunct lecturer. His passion for teaching was cultivated during his PhD when he worked as a lecturer for 2 years. We also talked about how his background in teaching has sharpened his skills as a consultant, especially in training and presenting to clients. He reflected on how this intersection between consulting and teaching was one of the key factors in his decision to start his career in consulting space. From my professional experience with him, I can vouch for his exceptional presentation skills – they truly stand out!

Ehsan completed his former education in Iran. Engineering was an obvious choice for him he said, but Industrial Engineering was not as widely chosen at the time. By the game of elimination, he found himself studying Industrial Engineering at Iran University of Science and Technology. It was an Operations Research course in his second year that piqued his interest in the field, and he realized this is something he wanted to pursue further. He went on to pursue his master’s degree at Sharif University of Technology, and then relocated to United States for his PhD at University of Louisville, where he delved into problems in Vehicle Routing and Warehousing. I know he loves programming, and he is an awesome one at that, but he shared with me a tinge of regret about not diving into programming earlier in his academic journey.

As a consultant, he realizes staying relevant and up to date is the key. Recent years have seen significant advancements in this field, especially with the rise of AI and tools like ChatGPT being on everyone’s mind. An increasing number of businesses are exploring ways to integrate AI into their operations. Moreover, the pandemic has brought supply chain issues to the forefront, making it a critical area of focus for many businesses. Companies are increasingly recognizing their supply chain’s challenges and seeking professional guidance. The industry’s focus has evolved from merely explaining the concept of analytics to ensuring that companies are not only strategically aligned with their goals, but also keeping pace with advancing technologies. Some useful resources we discussed for staying up to date in the OR domain are provided in the links below.

Ehsan’s love for movies and storytelling peeked into our conversation as we were discussing the importance of presentation skills and storytelling to excel in this field. He strongly believes that these skills are fundamental and essential not just for consultants but also for developers in creating code that is not just functional but also presentable. Beyond the necessary programming skills, he emphasized the critical role that problem-solving and critical thinking mindset plays for anyone working on the complex problems that we face.

We could not miss talking about the advantages offered by working at a smaller company, like ours, over our experience at larger firms. While our experiences may not mirror every small firm, we have experienced firsthand how the culture at such companies is often shaped by its people, making it more a personal work environment. The flatter organizational structure typically found in smaller companies enhances approachability, which means employees can have greater visibility and significantly contribute to the firm’s success. Though Ehsan could not stop talking about how much he loves his role at Decision Spot, he did not shy away from acknowledging the challenges inherent to smaller companies. The proximity to decision making processes also translates to more responsibility and accountability for employees, which may not align with everyone’s preferences. The ‘high risk, high reward’ nature of small companies stands in stark contrast with the stability and security often felt in larger corporations. So, the choice largely boils down to individual goals, personality, and life circumstances. Ehsan also highlighted a unique challenge we face as a smaller company, particularly in uncertain economic times like today. The lack of brand recognition for smaller firms can create a catch-22 situation, as companies become hesitant to invest in new projects that can offer them increased efficiency in these times. The ongoing challenge for us is to convincingly articulate the importance of our work to potential clients despite these economic headwinds.

We wrapped up our chat on an optimistic and forward-looking note, discussing Ehsan’s future goals. While he modestly outlined the projected trajectory of his career, I have no doubt he will exceed his own expectations in due course. “Never say Never,” he concluded, perfectly capturing his open-minded approach and positive outlook in life.

Some Resources:
- [Subject. To. Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/show/2aicKZBwHWGDNCPTb46VWP) – Tune in to engaging discussions with influential figures in Operations Research.
- [OR Stack Exchange](https://or.stackexchange.com) – Ask any questions related to OR.
- [Discord Channel](https://discord.gg/k5AtFccjne) - a platform to network with relevant people.
- [Gurobi games and videos](https://www.gurobi.com/burrito-optimization-game/) – cool stuff for someone starting in the field.
- [Gurobi Webinars](https://www.gurobi.com/webinars/) - Specialized workshops designed to elevate your understanding of optimization.
